---

layout: default

title: "What the F#"

date: 2020-12-30-00:00:00 -0000

comments: true

published: false

image: posts/2021-01-30-What-the-F#/run.png

excerpt_separator: <!--more-->

---

# What the F#!

In a previous [post](https://onurgumus.github.io/2020/12/26/Functional-Programming.html) I have explained my motivations about functional programming.
It's no secret I love F# and find it extremely underrated. In this post I would like to discuss different aspects of F#.

## F# is independent from .NET 

F# is mostly known to community as small ignored brother of C# running on .net platform. However what is less known about F# is that it
has come to a maturity level to be .NET independent. Thanks to Fable, today F# can be considered as a complete replacement of TypeScript. Yes
people do write full blown applications SPA, React, Svelte applications by using F# instead of TypeScript. There is also a new target for Fable
that can transpile to Python. It also works as on WebAssembly with Bolero. I would say this is a unique reason to F#. Just like JavaScript people
were using node to bring the front end devs to the backend zone, F# is also can be used to bring your backend devs to the front end. You can practically share 
your code between your .NET/Node backend and the one runs in the browser, giving you isomorphic development experience. 

This is somewhat put's F# to an interesting position as historically most dotnet has been languages are managed by Microsoft. But Fable simply liberates
F# from Microsoft and .NET.

## FSharp fanboys

There is some chance you might have heard "one of those guys" who is talking how great functional programming and/or F#. And from that point
the below picture summarizes the situation




However let's look at from the other side and this is how an F# developer feels when he is suggesting you F#


## Microsoft's and community's stance

From a Microsoft's point of view, F# is supported and planned to be supported however in practice .NET == C# and that is that. From a developer community
point of view things are worse. Since all Microsoft docs and tools geared towards C#, most people follow C# way and stay away his "weirdo" brother. 
And most non .NET people are not willing to touch anything related with Microsoft even with a 6 feet pole. (Of course the major exceptions to these is TypeScript and Visual Studio Code both are widely popular). Functional programmers also dismiss F# at sight blaming it's not a Haskell wanna be. 


## Unique features of F#

I am not going to talk about features of F# but just wanted to highlight couple of them.

The first one is the file order. Please look at below photo

[file-order]()

In F# the order of the files matter. It is somewhat a disliked feature by the new comers, but it makes the dependencies immidieatly visible.
So the code in the  top file has no dependency any others and the 2nd file from the top only depends on the first. When you open a project which you are not 
familiar with this helps finding your way among the files and code. 

Second one is TypeProviders

[type-providers]()

Type providers, are somewhat code generators but they do that non-intrusively. Very roughly similar to LISP style macros. Type providers makes it very 
easy to discover  html or json documents read database and discover ddl and rows within the coding screen. And everything becomes so type safe.

## Develop fantastic UI with F# and Elmish

Well they say seeing is beleiving, so let's see how well F# handles UI development. While React devs on Facebook trying to solve the state problem over and over again by using hooks and perhaps new experimental
recoil and contexts they are all horrible options as they encourage rendering code inter-mix with business remings me asp.net web forms times where you could write your SQL statements right into the page itself, F# developers ported elm architecture to something called elmish and it flourished well among F# community.

Here's a list of things you can do with Elmish as you can write your business code once and port it to any UI platform below:

## Getting started and resources Resources

If you are sold with F# there is one important point to highlight. Do not treat F#, just another language with different syntax especially if you are familiar
with Python, Ruby, JavaScript, C# etc. You have to embrace Functional programming as a paradigm. F# is a functional first programming language. In other words,
although F# has OOP syntax as well it mostly makes sense to use F# when you want to get benefit from functional programming concepts. If you try to program
F# the same way you program other imperative languages you won't get much benefit.

Here's screenshot of first attempt of one of the ASP.NET developer's creating an F# project:
[asp.net]()


If you are a C# develeoper and you want to start functional programming with F# this is the go to book:
*Disclaimer: I do not know the author nor I am affiliated with the publisher by any way*

Although the book is mostly about C#, it will show you how painful to do Functional programming with C# and only perhaps then you can develop
some love for F#.




## Actual projects

