---

layout: default

title: "What the F#"

date: 2020-12-31-00:00:00 -0000

comments: true

published: false

image: posts/2021-01-31-What-the-F#/run.png

excerpt_separator: <!--more-->

---

# What the F#!

In a previous [post](https://onurgumus.github.io/2020/12/26/Functional-Programming.html) I have explained my motivations about functional programming.
It's no secret I love F# and find it extremely underrated. In this post, I would like to discuss different aspects of F#.

## F# is gaining independence from .NET 

F# is mostly known to the community as the small ignored brother of C# running on the .NET platform. However, what is less known about F# is that it
has come to a maturity level to be .NET independent. Thanks to Fable, today F# can be considered as a complete replacement of TypeScript. Yes,
people do write full-blown applications SPA, React, Svelte applications by using F# instead of TypeScript. There is also a new target for Fable
that can transpile to Python. It also works as on WebAssembly with Bolero. I would say this is a unique reason to F#. Just like JavaScript people
were using nodejs to bring the front-end devs to the backend zone, F# is also can be used to bring your backend devs to the front end. You can practically share your code between your. NET/Node backend and the one runs in the browser, giving you an isomorphic development experience. 

This is somewhat puts F# in an interesting position as historically most dotnet has been languages are managed by Microsoft. But Fable simply liberates
F# from Microsoft and. NET.

## The F# fanboys

There is some chance you might have heard "one of those guys" who is talking how great functional programming and/or F#. And from that point
the below picture summarizes the situation



However, let's look at it from the other side and this is how an F# developer feels when he is suggesting you F#


## Microsoft's and community's stance

From Microsoft's point of view, F# is actively supported and maintained. There are developers actively fixing things and adding new features however as a general Microsoft's point of view .NET == C# and that is that. From the developer community
point of view, things are even worse. Since all Microsoft docs and tools geared towards C#, adding up unfamiliarity with the functional paradigm, most people follow C# way and completely ignore its little brother F#.

And most non-.NET people are not willing to touch anything related to Microsoft even with a 6 feet pole. (Of course, the major exceptions to this are TypeScript and Visual Studio Code which both are widely popular). The  Functional programmers' camp also dismisses F# at sight blaming it's not like Haskell primarily does not support type classes. 


## Couple of unique features of F#

I am not going to talk about features of F# but just wanted to highlight a couple of them.

The first one is the file order. Please look at the below photo

[file-order]()

In F# the order of the files matter. It is somewhat a disliked feature by the newcomers, but it makes the dependencies immediately visible.
So the code in the top file has no dependency on any others and the 2nd file from the top only depends on the first. When you open a project which you are not 
familiar with this helps to find your way among the files and code. 

The second one is TypeProviders

[type-providers]()

Type providers are somewhat code generators but they do that non-intrusively. Very roughly similar to LISP style macros. Type providers make it very easy to discover HTML or JSON documents read database rows and discover DDL and rows within the coding screen. And everything becomes so type-safe.

## Develop fantastic UI apps with F# and Elmish

Well they say seeing is believing, so let's see how well F# handles UI development. While React devs on Facebook trying to solve the state problem over and over again by using hooks and perhaps new experimental
recoil and contexts are all horrible options as they encourage rendering code inter-mix with business remind me asp.net web forms times where you could write your SQL statements right into the page itself, F# developers ported elm architecture to something called elmish and it flourished well among F# community.

Here's a list of things you can do with Elmish as you can write your business code once and port it to any UI platform below:

## Getting started and some resources

If you want to get started to F#, the first place you should check out is [F# Software Foundation](https://fsharp.org/)

[fsharp-foundation]()

As you can see FSF offers mentorship programs periodically, which means you can have free weekly 1 on 1 sessions with an experienced F# developer! 

* React: [Elmish React](https://github.com/elmish/react)
* Windows Desktop: [Elmish WPF](https://github.com/elmish/Elmish.WPF)
* Gaming: [Xelmish](https://github.com/ChrisPritchard/Xelmish)
* Cross platform UI: [Avalonia.FuncUI](https://github.com/AvaloniaCommunity/Avalonia.FuncUI)
* Mobile development: [Fabulous](https://github.com/fsprojects/Fabulous)
* Terminal: [Terminal.Gui.Elmish](https://github.com/DieselMeister/Terminal.Gui.Elmish)
* Web Assembly: [Bolero](https://fsbolero.io/)

They all share the same single architecture: Elmish

If you are sold with F# there is one important point to highlight. Do not treat F#, just another language with different syntax especially if you are familiar
with Python, Ruby, JavaScript, C#, etc. You have to embrace Functional programming as a paradigm. F# is a functional-first programming language. In other words,
although F# has OOP syntax as well it mostly makes sense to use F# when you want to get benefit from functional programming concepts. If you try to program
F# the same way you program other imperative languages you won't get much benefit.

Here's a screenshot of the first attempt of one of ASP.NET developer's creating an F# project:
[asp.net]()


If you are a C# develeoper and you want to start functional programming with F# this is the go-to book:
*Disclaimer: I do not know the author nor I am affiliated with the publisher by any way*

[Functional C#]()
Although the book is mostly about C#, it will show you how painful to do Functional programming with C# and only perhaps then you can develop
some love for F#. Having that said it will also help you to understand some more new coming but confusing features of C#9 like Records and Pattern matching.
If you think  C# records are for immutability, no they are not. They are for Value semantics and [referential transparency](https://www.sitepoint.com/what-is-referential-transparency/#:~:text=In%20functional%20programming%2C%20referential%20transparency,the%20result%20of%20the%20program.).

To try F# right away you can try the following links:

https://try.fsharp.org/

https://fable.io/repl/

https://tryfsharp.fsbolero.io/

## Syntax

When you are unfamiliar with F# syntax, it might look cryptic. And I have seen some people complained that it is very verbose. On the contrary, I would make a bold claim that F# beats most other languages when it comes to conciseness. You don't believe me, see your self (make sure you check all implementations)

RosettaCode(https://rosettacode.org/wiki/Category:F_Sharp)


## A couple of projects of mine


And finally here are a couple of projects I have built. One is a full blazor/web assembly project:

https://github.com/OnurGumus/FBlazorShop


And the actual app for [3D bin packing problem]()

https://github.com/OnurGumus/BinDrake

http://bindrake.com/
